# Notes

### Tools

- [nasm](https://www.nasm.us/index.php)
- [qemu](https://www.qemu.org/)

#### Assembler

An assembler is a program that converts assembly language into machine code. It takes the basic commands and operations from assembly code and converts them into binary code that can be recognized by the specific type of processor. 

[Techterms – assembler]

#### BIOS(Basic Input/Output System)

The four main functions of a BIOS:

- **POST (power-on self-test)** – Checks and tests the computer's internal hardware for compatibility and connection before starting the remainder of the boot process.
- **Bootstrap Loader** – Locate the operating system. If a capable operating system is located, the BIOS will pass control to it.
- **BIOS drivers** – Low-level drivers that give the computer basic operational control over your computer's hardware.
- **BIOS setup** – Configuration program that enables hardware settings including system settings such as computer passwords, time, and date.

[Computerhope]

#### Interrupts

Interrupts are signals sent to the CPU by external devices, normally I/O devices, such as a mouse or keyboard. They tell the CPU to stop its current activities and execute the appropriate part of the operating system.

There are three types of interrupts:

- **Hardware Interupts** are generated by hardware devices to signal that they need some attention from the OS. They may have just received some data (e.g., keystrokes on the keyboard or an data on the ethernet card); or they have just completed a task which the operating system previous requested, such as transfering data between the hard drive and memory.

- **Software Interupts** are generated by programs when they want to request a system call to be performed by the operating system.

- **Traps** are generated by the CPU itself to indicate that some error or condition occured for which assistance from the operating system is needed.

Interrupts are important because they give the user better control over the computer. Without interrupts, a user may have to wait for a given application to have a higher priority over the CPU to be ran. This ensures that the CPU will deal with the process immediately.

*An interrupt is sent to the processor as an interrupt request, or IRQ. Each input device has a unique IRQ setting, or priority. This prevents conflicts and ensures common input devices, such as keyboards and mice, are prioritized.*

[K-State]
[Techterms – interrupt]


#### CPU registers
In Computer Architecture, the Registers are very fast computer memory which are used to execute programs and operations efficiently.

<!-- Some registers are used internally and cannot be accessed outside the processor, while others are user-accessible. Most modern CPU architectures include both types of registers. -->

- **Accumulator (ACC):** This is the most frequently used register used to store data taken from memory. It is in different numbers in different microprocessors.
- **Memory Address Registers (MAR)**: It holds the address of the location to be accessed from memory. MAR and MDR (Memory Data Register) together facilitate the communication of the CPU and the main memory.
- **Memory Data Registers (MDR)**: It contains data to be written into or to be read out from the addressed location.
- **General Purpose Registers**: These are numbered as R0, R1, R2….Rn, and used to store temporary data during any ongoing operation. Its content can be accessed by assembly programming.
- **Program Counter (PC)**: Is used to keep the track of execution of the program. It contains the memory address of the next instruction to be fetched. PC points to the address of the next instruction to be fetched from the main memory when the previous instruction has been successfully completed. Program Counter (PC) also functions to count the number of instructions.
- **Instruction Register (IR)**: It is the register which holds the instruction which is currently been executed.

[Geeksforgeeks]


#### Memory Offsets

In computer engineering and low-level programming (such as assembly language), an offset usually denotes the number of address locations added to a base address in order to get to a specific absolute address. In this (original) meaning of offset, only the basic address unit, usually the 8-bit byte, is used to specify the offset's size. In this context an offset is sometimes called a relative address.

[Wikipedia – Offset (computer science)]


#### Pointers

 A pointer is simply a variable containing an address of another variable, array or other data structure. We can also say that the address is the pointer itself.

 Assembly language allows you to use pointers with greater flexibility because pointers are de-referenced by using memory addressing modes. These memory addressing modes imply the use of registers to de-reference a pointer (in other words, to access the pointing object). You are not restricted to using only one register containing the base address of a variable, you can use multiple registers as indices to access another variable or object.

There are two ways of how you can obtain a pointer value directly by using a single instruction only.

- Use the mov instruction to assign a pointer to a 32-bit/64-bit register by specifying the name of the variable without using brackets. The compiler will substitute the text of this variable with the actual address.
- Specify the variable to the lea instruction. The address will be assigned to a 32-bit or 64-bit register. Lea stands for load effective address.

[The ASM Blog]


#### Stack
#### Control Structures
#### Function Calling
#### Strings
#### Segmentation

###### Resources

- [Computerhope](https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/b/bios.htm)
- [Geeksforgeeks](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/different-classes-of-cpu-registers/)
- [K-State](http://faculty.salina.k-state.edu/tim/ossg/Introduction/OSworking.html)
- [Techterms – assembler](https://techterms.com/definition/assembler)
- [Techterms – interrupt](https://techterms.com/definition/interrupt)
- [The ASM Blog](https://theasmblog.com/2020/02/29/pointers-in-assembly-language/)
- [University of Virginia](https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~evans/cs216/guides/x86.html)
- [Wikipedia – Offset (computer science)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Offset_(computer_science))